news tonight and the author of a book on
the Pentagon titled the puzzle palace
his new book body of secrets anatomy of
the ultra secret National Security
Agency is number nine on this week's New
York Times bestseller list next he
explains the NSA's role in u.s. foreign
policy using examples from his research
it's about 55 minutes
Jim Belk I will say did a great job of
setting this up and everybody else
Forrest Frank we're glad to have you
here it's a brand new facility we moved
in 15th of March I think it was we had
our first meeting here at the first week
in April and you all the first ones for
a nighttime meeting we really seriously
like some feedback from you on how you
like the facilities and what we could do
to do things better because we hope the
hosts a few more of these a little
history a hand on answer very very short
we're a public service nonprofit public
service research cooperation we've been
around around a while we've been here
since 1958 as a matter of fact and we do
contract research mainly for the DOB
once our specialties homeland security
that's something new we've gotten into
over the last few years but we've been
in acquisition management I'll say
support forever okay all the way from
concept development right through to
retirement in the system a quickie on
answer that's all I'm gonna say and
introduce Forrest Fred Thank You
president Potomac chaplain might even
take over Thank You Jeanne as you know
my name is Forrest Frank and it's a
great privilege and honour for me to be
here this evening to welcome you and our
speaker mr. James Bamford will be
introduced in a moment by our vice
president for programs Phil Horne
I'd like to draw your attention to the
presence of the c-span camera because
this presentation will be televised I
think on a delay basis some of us are
sensitive to imagery and those of us who
are uncomfortable being on an imaged are
welcome to join me in the back right
hand corner where we will be behind and
out of camera range I'd like to extend a
special thanks to Jean and Jim Belk and
all the other funny folks here at answer
we're welcoming us into their wonderful
new conference facility this is a
delightful place to be here great time
and wish you much success or in your
future endeavors just a couple of
business items the next chapter event
will be a luncheon on May 17th on Sunday
May 20th will be the national awards
banquet I hope all of you will be able
to attend you will also note at the
entrance to this facility as a flyer
announcing the 1991 open source
solutions conference nmi a members were
offered a 10% discount from appropriate
fees and I'd encourage those of you who
aren't going to be there with Bill Horn
helping to try and attend if possible
this is a wonderful event it's very
worthwhile and Robert Steele who is the
organizer of this event always rewards
our chapter with a substantial
contribution for our volunteer help it
is contributions such as that we get
from from Robert that enable us to host
an event like this tonight and we're
delighted and encourage everyone to
participate later in the evening we will
announce the results of our chapter
elections I don't think we have them
exactly yet anyone who hasn't yet voted
please see Lori and we'll be happy to
give you a chance to participate also at
the conclusion of this evening's
presentation those of you who promised
to pay by credit card
would you please see mr. golden we
raised your hand our credit card machine
has arrived now if you don't see him
he's going to see you as will mr. Belk
and yeah I got the belt retired from the
Air Force intelligence world I can't
tell you what you did but I don't think
it'd be good if you haven't paid on that
let me introduce if I may our vice
president for programs mr. bill Horne
Thank You Forrest it's my pleasure to
have the honor of introducing Jim
Bamford might mention that at the
conclusion of this period after mr.
Bamford answers some questions we will
leave this conference room we'd like to
all clear out so the cleaners can go to
work in here and go out where the food
and drink are and the books and there
will be some more books available for
sale and also more autographs given it
looks like we've got way ahead of it on
the books already so it's a pretty good
deal
the words of mr. Bamford are his own and
so Nami a takes no position on the
accuracy or the factual basis of his
presentation but we are very pleased
this time to have such a honored author
so what we think has written an
important book that will have a real
impact in the dialogue in this country
on the intelligence system James Bamford
having just completed the body of
Secrets
the anatomy of the ultra secret NSA from
the Cold War to the dawn of the new
century published by doubleday
this is a sequel to his award-winning
the puzzle palace which made him a
reputation both welcome and unwelcome
within the intelligence community
depending on where you sat in this
situation but certainly earned him a
place as one of the authorities writing
on the National Security Agency in on
national security subjects James Bamford
was for nine years until 1998 Washington
investigative producer for ABC News
World News Tonight with Peter Jennings
he was responsible for long-term
in-depth investigative stories from
concept to final airing a wide range of
topics included from the White House
scandals to locating spies in Cold War
Europe to finding murderers in the
Middle East many involved complicated
investigations and difficult areas of
the world such as locating principal
figures involved in the Clinton
campaigns finance scandal hiding in
China
is recipient of numerous TV reporting
awards including the Overseas Press Club
award for excellence the Society for
Professional Journalists deadline award
for the best investigative reporting on
TV he has written on investigative
topics for many national magazines
including cover stories for the New York
Times Magazine on iran-contra Washington
Post magazine the on the shoot-down of
the KL double-oh-seven
flight the Los Angeles Times magazine on
the Mafia he's got another one coming
out the New York Times Book Review for
this next Sunday as his book as the lead
item here I'm told it's a very favorable
review
he's written dozens of op-ed pieces and
book reviews the New York Times
Washington Post LA Times some of you may
have seen him on TV or heard him on
radio here just in the last several days
he's certainly getting around I've heard
him twice unlike the interviews
he's testified on intelligence and
security issues before committees of
Senate and House of Representatives it
is with great pleasure and anticipation
that a welcome James family I want to
thank bill and very nice introduction I
really appreciate it and Jean I want to
thank you for the hospitality of having
this session here and let me speak here
in your beautiful building and for us
thanks very much for having me a speaker
on your organizations terrific writing
about NSA and secret parts of government
benefits and deficits the when I did the
puzzle palace the problem was when I
wrote the book almost nobody knew what
NSA was when I wrote it
my editors at Hope Mifflin at the time
thought I was writing a novel at first I
think it was six months into it that
they began to realize this is a real
agency I'm writing about one of the
funny things was when I was on my book
tour after the puzzle palace came out
one of the people that I had to share a
car with going to one of the TV sessions
was Bill Bradley Senator Bill Bradley
from New Jersey and in the back of the
taxi he said what's your book about and
I said it's about NSA the National
Security Agency and he said what's that
so I spent the rest of the taxi ride
explaining what the largest Intelligence
Agency was when we got on the TV show he
went first he was talking about the
economy and then they asked me about NSA
and the first question was how secret is
it how secret is NSA and I just couldn't
resist it I said even senator Bradley
said he'd never heard of it and so he
got very angry after that I think I had
to take the separate taxi back
and his aide called me up the next day
so that was a very low blow I said no I
was just telling the truth I said it for
I wanted a low blow I would have said he
confused it with the NBA but also when
the book came out there was a every
author wants to get on the Book of the
Month Club so you look at the back of
the New York Times where they put your
little little picture of your book tiny
little picture of it and so Book of the
Month Club pick my book and and I looked
at the back of the New York Times Book
Review and and there it was but they had
changed something it said instead of
saying a report on NSA America's most
secret agency they changed it and said a
report on NASA America's most secret
agency because the ad company thought I
had made a mistake on the jacket of my
book and they voluntarily changed it for
me so at least the NSA is a little bit
better known now one of the other
problems I had when when the book came
out they went to I go into a bookstore
and ask you know my book is there and
sometimes I go around look to see if the
book is is where it should be and I
don't see it I'd asked for it see if
it's in the bookstore and one of the
things that used to bother me was when I
didn't see it and I go ask for it and
the clerk would say well yes we have
four copies of it and I'd say where is
it and they'd say it's in the puzzle
section so I definitely changed the name
of the book this time the body of
secrets and the problem I had this time
however was I tried to be a little cute
it was body of secrets and then anatomy
of America's ultra secret NSA and then
all the chapter titles or body parts
brain for all about the computer's hard
about the internal workings of NSA and
so forth and then I began running out of
body parts and I didn't know what
chapter to name you know gall bladder or
something like that so but this time it
was a little bit different NSA was a lot
more cooperative and they opened the
door crack for me to take a peek in and
director Hayden was very nice and gave
me a number of interviews and tours and
all that type of thing and they're even
having a book signing for me it but
say tomorrow so it's a different
reaction than the last time so I guess
at the end of the Cold War and the
number of years sort of mellows
everybody let me just tell you a little
bit about what this books about first of
all I wanted to there's been a lot of
books on world war ii the ultra and
breaking of the purple code and all that
so i wanted to start on the de world war
ii ended basically and what i started
with was very interesting it's something
that few people ever knew about and what
happened was that as a war was coming to
an end he had all these cryptologists
who were in Bletchley Park and watched
the war vicariously like Boyer's almost
through the messages of the messages of
the the enemy and then as the war was
coming to an end the decision was made
to take a lot of these cryptologists
from the monastery there in Bletchley
Park and put him right in the front
lines which really surprised a lot of
them he had some of these people going
out for gun practice and they weren't
very good at shooting guns and they were
very nervous about being parachuted into
the front lines but the whole idea
behind this operation it was called ti'
comm which is short for target committee
and the idea was a joint committee
between our joint project between the
british and the americans and the idea
was to fly the cryptologists to the
frontlines drop them in there and have
them capture as many code machines
cipher machines from the germans as
possible and as many cryptologists from
the german cryptologist as possible the
reason for that they had two principal
reasons for doing that one was to get
there before the russians got there
because they if they figured that the
germans were able to break us or british
ciphers they wanted to get there and get
those machines and get those people
before the russians got in and found it
and the second reason was to capture
whatever the the germans might have in
terms of breaking
Russian ciphers because they knew that
they had been working on Russian ciphers
for quite a while so they they weren't
able to parachute in the front lines
because the war started disintegrating
towards the end and and they so they
wrote in on on jeeps and trucks to the
pretty much the front lines and they had
one major they had a lot of discoveries
one of the things they discovered was
that the Germans never did break any
major u.s. ciphers which made them very
happy
a couple low-level ciphers a couple
lowered naval ciphers they broke but but
none of the major ciphers so they felt
fairly confident about their about us is
own cipher system then they went after
the Germans to find out what they knew
about the Russian system and they were
very successful about that they they
found these German prisoners and one of
the Allied prison camps who worked on
cipher machines and so forth and during
an interrogation they told him that we
they had broken the Russian principle
cipher one of their high level ciphers
and that they know where the machine is
that broke it the machine had been
hidden under the ground under the front
of one of the German buildings so the
the American and British cypher people
went there and dug it up and it was a
huge machine it filled up for ten ton
trucks a giant machine and and they set
it up and they had the the Germans there
show them how to work it and lo and
behold they had managed to find a key to
breaking the Russian cipher very early
on which was very lucky because they
hadn't he never even attacked it never
even tried to break it during the entire
war with a small exception of this
vanilla project which was very small and
and only had to do with the number of
messages previously intercepted and and
mostly had to do with the KGB code and
so forth so this was a major advance for
the code breakers in the US and in
Britain
and that lasted until 1948 and in 1948
everything just went silent and NSA's
ears went totally deaf at that point
because the Russians have managed to
have a spy in the predecessor to NSA at
the time and that spy I gave away the
key secrets
it's that machine that that the
predecessor at NSA was using to break
the codes so at that point the Russian
government ordered that no more signals
be sent through the air that land lines
be used and made major improvements in
its cipher system and throughout most of
the 1950s the NSA was basically deaf
during basically death in terms of
trying to eavesdrop on high-level
Russian ciphers President Eisenhower in
late 50s became very worried about it
and I've got documents from the
Eisenhower library that have been
recently Declassified where he's talking
about the problem and he's right in the
Oval Office he's saying we've got to
break the Russian code and so forth and
he he started this project lightning
which was one of the largest government
finance projects in history up to that
time in terms of building up the u.s.
computer strength and that was going to
be the key to helping to break some of
these Russian ciphers so the American
computer industry got a major the the
pump for the computer industry got
primed with this project lightning a
great deal of money went into it and the
American computer industry really took
off after that during the early 60s I
write about the that basically Bay of
Pigs and the Cuban Missile Crisis and
there have been dozens of books written
on the Cuban Missile Crisis but not one
even mentions NSA during what intro NSA
plate if you see that recent movie 13
days the NSA gets mentioned once during
the entire movie but NSA did play a
major role in the
missile crisis although those secrets
have never come out so I'm writing about
them basically for the first time in my
book a lot of them and it was a really
interesting period because the US had
listening posts all around the the
Soviet Union and we're picking up
indications of when they were sending
ships out and the ships would try to
mask where they were going they would
send out signals saying we're leaving
from Black Sea and going to Africa or
something but then through
high-frequency direction-finding they'd
find the ships aren't going to Africa
they were going to Cuba and a lot of
times they'd be on their official
broadcast be lying about what was being
loaded in terms of cargo
but NSA was able to pick up what the
real cargo was and a lot of the ships
and all of a sudden they had all these
passenger ships going to Cuba loaded
with thousands of passengers when most
Russians can't get out to take vacations
and Cuba very often so they figure these
were all the people going to work on the
missiles and so forth so NSA played a
large role in terms of getting the
government's attention the
administration's attention to looking at
Cuba it was the Air Force actually
flying a u2 that picked up the first
indications of the the first photos of
the of the missiles but NSA had a major
ship the USS Oxford sitting right off
Havana Harbor was only six miles off of
Ana Harbor and it would just go back and
forth and the Cubans knew exactly what
it was there for and they would harass
it a lot of times it fly planes low or
they send torpedo boats out and point
their guns at the ship and try to
intimidate it and the people on the ship
were you know trying to pick up as many
signals as possible and I knew it was a
hazardous area but at one point they
picked up a key signal and that was the
activation of one of the of the missiles
I mean we knew that they had missiles
before but once they heard the signal
from the missile from the warhead
basically they they knew that the
missiles were activated at that moment
which was a
there was another milestone in NSA
actually flew a helicopter over and
picked up the tape and got it back to
NSA right away during the one of the
hairiest times for the crew members I
interviewed quite a few of the crew
members was during Kennedy's broadcast
that night because they didn't really
have a sense of how really really how
dangerous it was and then they heard in
live on the radio the Kennedy Address
and they're looking out their polar
portholes and seeing
Havana Harbor only six miles away and
they were getting very nervous since the
if you know anything or ever came they
were the first ones they were gonna go
but they played an important role during
that entire period a role that really
hasn't been talked about much so I get
into that quite a bit in the book from
there I go into Vietnam NSA's role in
Vietnam has never been written about and
it took a lot of research because NSA
just starting to sort of declassify some
of that but it's an important role the
very first person ever killed in Vietnam
and during the Vietnam War was an army
signals intelligence person trying to do
Direction finding I think was 1961 the
reason the u.s. committed itself very
heavily was because of NSA to a large
degree it was during the Gulf of Tonkin
incident for example the Gulf of Tonkin
incident came about because one of the
ships the USS Maddox was a eavesdropping
ship it was a ship just collecting
signals along the coast of Vietnam and
at the same time the the at the same
time the ship was cruising up and down
and collecting signals the US was
sponsoring these attacks along the coast
and the North Vietnamese connected the
two they thought that the ships were
directing these these attacks on the
coast and to some degree that's what the
United States wanted him to do because
then they would be able to get a lot
more signals the problem was by
connecting the the
with the attacks on the shore the North
Vietnamese then came out and attacked
the Maddox at one point they attempted
to attack it they they missed it one on
the first attempt and in about two days
later
well after that first attempt the u.s.
put another ship an escort ship there
too to protect it it was called the turn
of joy and about two days later a day
and a half later so the Maddox got a
emergency message from NSA saying that
they're about to be attacked and that
night was very foggy and the Maddox and
the turn of joy began seeing all these
images on their radar scopes indicating
that that attacks are taking place and
torpedoes are being shot at the ship and
so forth it wasn't until and after that
President Johnson got very upset and
that's when the Congress passed almost
unanimously the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution based on these incidents but
it wasn't until years later that it was
discovered that that message that most
important message the warning message
that went out to the Maddox was a
mistake that message was about the
previous attack two days earlier and the
message just went out late so there will
never was a message indicating that they
were about to be attacked the second
night and it was later determined that
most of what they were seeing on those
radar scopes because was a foggy night
and all that were sort of ghost images
so no attack ever took place
that second night but that was what
basically led to the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution in 1964 so NSA played a major
role in advertently in the entire
launching of the u.s. formal entry into
the war during the Vietnam War was the
NSA played a major role in trying to
eavesdrop on virtually all the signals
in in Vietnam they had people on the
ground that would do Direction finding
trying to find out where the Vietcong
were and it was an extremely dangerous
job and that's the job that the this
sergeant Davis who was the first person
killed was doing at the time and then it
was like a wedding cake in terms of the
way the eavesdropping was done over over
Vietnam he had the people on the ground
then you had another level which was the
helicopters and then small one in two
engine planes and then the four engine
eavesdropping planes Sigyn planes and
eventually you get up to the they had
you twos that were flying off the coast
and they would be monitoring signals and
it was a very boring job for the You
Tube pilots because unlike when they're
flying the photo missions and they're
actually flying over things and taking
pictures and snapping turning things on
and off with the second mission they
were basically just a relay station and
so they fly these circle circular
patterns over over the Gulf of Tonkin
and pick up the signals and then just
relay them to a down downlink down in
safe area of South Vietnam so he had and
then above the u2's where the sr-71 that
would fly in from Kadena Air Force Base
in Okinawa and they leave in the morning
and fly their mission and fly back and
they're back in time for lunch and their
entire time I think it was over Vietnam
was was and that's back and forth was
only 12 minutes any rate would have
collect an enormous amount of signals
and then there was still the rc-135
which was like a vacuum cleaner that
picked up all these signals and then
they had drones that were picking up
more signals so there was a huge effort
to do this one of the problems one of
the major factors for us losses in
Vietnam however was the opposite side of
the coin senior US military officials
there were pretty sloppy when I came to
communications security the NSA did a
huge report on the whole this entire
problem was called deadly transmissions
and that's what it was because a lot of
the signals there was a lot of
misunderstanding about
sophistication of the Viet Cong and the
North Vietnamese Army you know they saw
these people wearing these tire treads
for sandals and so forth so a lot of the
senior military didn't think they'd be
very sophisticated but eventually when
they started discovering some of these
hideouts that they had they found reams
of transcripts of high-level US military
communications because a lot of military
commanders were too lazy to use
encryption systems they use the regular
open telephone which was heavily
penetrated by the North Vietnamese and
Viet Cong so in addition to that the
Russians had a ship sitting off an
intelligence collection ship sitting off
Guam at the time we were flying the
b-52s and then as they did a survey
around Guam after a while and began
finding out they're picking up a lot of
signals and and the pilots when they
were transmitting information on the way
to Vietnam that information was being
picked up also so there were a lot of
not only a lot of times when the b-52s
ended up bombing areas where there was
nobody there because the Vietcong had
done out about it earlier there were
times when when the Vietnamese actually
turned the turn the tables and found out
u.s. access codes or a lot of times
there were no access codes to some of
this some of the military activities and
they would make up or they they'd find
out what the code words were and and
pretend they were a US you know somebody
in the Army and they'd send a helicopter
to go to a place that where they had an
ambush waiting so the communication
security was a very critical part of the
whole Vietnam War it was a critical part
for the Vietnamese doing as well as they
did and was a critical part for the u.s.
losses in a lot of occasions during the
latter stages of the war
but let me just move to the basically
the last days of the war which was very
interesting I was able to get from NSA a
great deal of the intercepts so there
weren't really intercepts but the last
days of the war when Saigon was falling
you had a task force out in the Tonkin
Gulf that was waiting for a lot of the
people who are leaving the embassy to
fly by a helicopter out to the ships and
so forth but the commander of the task
force was too large to be blind of what
was going on at the Embassy at the time
and and what was taking place so they
asked NSA to basically monitor embassy
communications and then pass all the
basically intercepts on to the commander
of the task force and I quote from a lot
of those intercepts in the book and it's
a fascinating tale of the last hours of
Saigon in the last hours of that embassy
there because what you're doing is
you're listening to the actual words of
what's happening as the whole embassy
complex is collapsing and how they're
trying to get the Ambassador out and the
only reason you know were able to
determine this is from the messages that
NSA was forwarding to the commands the
NSA had had a major disaster at the at
the very end one of his biggest
disasters I think in his history one of
the things that well at the Embassy they
did very well and trying to destroy all
the equipment and so forth before the
before the city fell but as the war was
coming to an end the u.s. tried to get a
lot of the encryption equipment back
from the South Vietnamese because they
had let them use some of the NSA's
sophisticated encryption equipment
during the during the war
and and actually during the period 1972
seventy five also but then it's 1975
came along that's the date when Saigon
fell in April of 1975 for about six
months before that they began trying to
get all this encryption equipment back
from from the South Vietnamese guy
because they didn't want it to fall in
the hands of the North Vietnamese
government and they did a good job of
accounting for it and getting it all
back and then they put it in this
warehouse at at Townsend at Airport and
it was right next to the Armed Forces
courier station which was going to take
all the equipment back well
unfortunately the city fell before they
were able to get all that equipment back
so there were about 700 pieces of
pristine high-level NSA cipher equipment
that that the Vietnamese captured when
they captured the city and which is
probably the largest single loss of
encryption equipment in US history see I
want to take questions so I don't want
to prolong this too long but I get into
the a lot of areas one of the most
important areas I get into in the book I
think is the attack on the USS Liberty
it's a very controversial area because
it was during the six-day war in 1967
Israel attacked the ship during broad
daylight
they sent fighters that shot about 800
of rounds into the ship 800 cannon
rounds they fired rockets into the ship
I dropped bombs on the ship and I came
back and they leveled napalm all over
the ship this is a spy ship NSA
eavesdropping ship it was 13 miles off
the coast of the Sinai when all this
took place the crew the ship was very
lightly armed there were only defensive
machine guns that could only reach about
a mile or so that was the total length
of the of the machine guns after the
aircraft really let the Liberty have it
then a number of well there were three
torpedo boats that came and they fired a
total of five torpedoes at the ship
luckily only one hit but that one that
hit hit right in the signals
intelligence space is killing
twenty-five intercept operators
immediately they were total 34 people
killed on the ship when
seven wounded the hole that was blasted
into the ship was big enough to drive a
bus into I think was 44 feet wide or
something like that it was huge and
despite it all the ship managed to
survive and the captain captain
McGonagall managed to get the ship back
to safety
the question is what happened during
that that period of time again this is
broad daylight
the Israelis had done a tremendous
amount of surveillance of the ship
beforehand they had sent planes going
over and coming back and and the crew
members every one of them says that the
flags were flying during the entire
attack in addition to that the names
were on the back of the the name was on
the back of the ship USS Liberty and
it's markings were all on american-style
naval markings on the ship I did a lot
of research on this largely through new
NSA documents I was able to obtain NSA
looked into this very extensively the
conclusions of a lot of the people
senior people at NSA was that it was
deliberate primarily because there was
no other possible explanation the ship
was not flying an Egyptian flag was not
carrying any Egyptian equipment or
script on the side yet the Israelis said
they thought it was an Egyptian ship and
the ship they they said they thought it
was was a ship that had been sitting at
a port 200 miles away and it never left
her in the entire war and what it was
was a troop and Horse transport about
1/3 the size of the of the Liberty in
addition they said they made a mistake
they thought the Liberty was going 30
knots and and it was outpacing their PT
boats delivery liberty at the time was
going about between 3 & 5 knots in his
top speed was 17 knots the they said
they thought the Liberty was bombarding
ala rish which was a city on the Sinai
desert about 13 miles away
the the the guns on the Liberty were
only these machine guns which should had
a total distance of 1 mile so there are
all these explanations that made no
sense in addition one of the things I
discovered was that at the time the
Liberty was off the coast of the Sinai
there were massive war crimes taking
place on the Sinai desert the Israelis
were killing Egyptian prisoners by the
hundreds and this has been reported not
only in the New York Times in the
Washington Post but the Israeli papers
because the historians the Israeli
military historians have come out and
told about this they wrote a report on
these these massacres during right after
the event and then the Israeli
government covered it up so what you
have was all this activity taking place
on the Sinai he had an eavesdropping
ship 13 miles away that the Israelis
knew about because they had flown all
the all the surveillance missions and
even one of the the naval one of the
naval officers in the Naval Command said
that he had identified the liberty
through jane's fighting ship and passed
on that identification so the bottom
line was that Israel did an
investigation they prosecuted nobody
they demoted nobody most of the people
involved eventually went on high careers
and so forth the u.s. never did any
investigation whatsoever they had a
couple small inquiries into the problems
with the communications getting messages
to him from the liberty they had in a
naval court of inquiry that looked into
the performance of the sailors on the
ship whether they performed well and so
forth but the US government never did
one investigation into why this happened
unlike the USS Cole for example which
you know the day after it happened they
were plane loads of FBI agents flying to
Yemen this never had it there were twice
as many people killed in this incident
Congress never held an investigation I
mean Congress can look into spend weeks
looking into why people are fired in a
travel
office in the White House but they can't
look into wide 34 people I don't know
and a u.s. ship was virtually destroyed
so anyway this came under my purview was
writing about NSA was the worst loss of
life in NSA history and the conclusions
I come up with or you know the u.s.
should have an investigation even 34
years later we should look into what
happened it's only fair for the families
of the victims and the survivors who are
still alive
and I in the chapters I go also into the
problems that are cropping up now which
is is NSA going deaf is NSA starting to
lose its hearing because of all the
changes in technology I also discussed
the the question of Ashkelon this whole
thing that has the Europeans upset
whether NSA is eavesdropping on foreign
countries and so forth there are
commercial communications I was invited
to Brussels to speak before the European
Union or the European Parliament on on
Monday and I went there and I totaled
that in two books on NSA and having
written more than anybody else I've
never found one indication that NSA
picks up information from European
companies and passes it on to American
companies which didn't exactly make them
very happy but and then they began two
hours of two and a half hours of
interrogation as though I was the NSA
why are you sending these these you know
he's dropping on us and so forth but it
was a fun book to write because it was
like exploring a lost continent since
hardly anybody had ever traveled on
these roads before in terms of writing
it and you know if you all come back in
20 years I'll have the third of my
trilogy finished about this time we
could speak here again anyway I'd like
to take whatever questions we can my
name is Scott Palmer and I'd like to
know if what you told us about the
interim period after World War two
before NSA is that covered in your book
yeah that's I start off with that in the
book that's the first very first chapter
yes
it's like the price of admission well
thanks very much yeah tech comm is still
considered very secret by both the US
and the British government yeah the US
government wanted to release Tyco on the
details of it and it's long sorry I
won't bore you with it but the British
objected to it and because the British
objected to it the US government still
never officially released documents the
documents I have just happened to be
sitting in the NSA Museum library so
open to anybody wants to look at them
yes any other questions yes sir
yes William horn do you have anything on
the Pueblo incident that you find
anything in that area yeah I did a whole
chapter on the Pueblo also the Pueblo
was a ship attacked off or captured by
the the North Vietnamese 1968 I North
North Korean sorry captured by North
Korea in 1968 in January of 1968 and one
of the interesting things about that
which which I discovered was that that
was captured in January of 1968 and
having talked to a number of the former
KGB KGB people it was a major success
for the the Russians because they were
able to capture the machines that were
on the on the Pueblo just like the
Chinese were able to capture all that
equipment on the ep-3 now but when the
Chinese were actually when the North
Vietnamese sorry the North Koreans when
they captured the Pueblo and got them at
machines off and pass it on to the
Russians they had half the puzzle the
Russians had half the puzzle they had
the machines but they didn't have the
key cards the things that actually
changed the codes every day so that loss
wasn't that important but what nobody
knew for over a decade was that almost
at the same time the previous November
John Walker began passing all the key
cards to the Russians so between the
time of 1967 and 1985 the Russians have
both the machines and the key cards so
they were able to to break a lot of the
high-level read a lot of the
higher-level encrypted communications
for over a decade because of that
oh yes sir Thank You Patrick Ryan on the
Liberty incident can you talk a little
bit about the reaction among those in
the NSA who believed it was a deliberate
attack if they tried to get the story
straight or get the story out as they
saw it or if there was any effort to
suppress the story also since you've
written about it have you been contacted
or has anyone approached you about you
know the position that that you're
putting forward either from the US
government or the Israeli government the
Pope just came out a couple of days ago
so nobody's you know nobody's approached
me really in any way in terms of the the
NSA reaction
I interviewed Marshall Carter the
director of NSA a number of years ago
for the puzzle palace I spent two days
with him interviewing him and he was
very extent gave me a very extensive
interview most of what I wrote about in
the puzzle palace one of the things he
did tell me that he didn't want printed
at the time was that he believed that it
was a deliberate attack I have it in in
this book here and body of secrets loot
or della for example he wrote an
internal memo memorandum for the record
very soon afterwards and that memorandum
has never come out until I write about
in my book here and he said he was very
had a lot of foresight I think he said
that the only explanation he could come
up with basically was that some
commander on the Sinai I was doing
something he didn't want the u.s. to
find out about general Morrison who was
the head of the operations at NSA at the
time he's actually deputy head of
operations at NSA at the time said there
there can't be any other explanation
Walter Dealey who did the investigation
for NSA concluded that the Israelis had
to know because of the extensive
intelligence they had there's a one
thing that just came up that I just
discovered a basically in the last few
weeks which was very interesting
matter of fact - Norman Paul Meyers book
here is a matter
on the NAU - there's a quote in there
from a from another book called
stalemate and it was a book written by
one of the officials at the Embassy in
Israel he was there from 1967 until 19
for about three years I guess it was and
he wrote in his book that he was told by
one of the other officials the deputy
chief of mission at the US Embassy in
Tel Aviv that in 1970 while the u.s. was
flying these patrols YouTube patrols
over the the Suez Canal to watch what
whether either side was violating the
the treaty that Moshe Dayan called him
over to his office and threatened him by
saying that if any of those u2's flied
over in our airspace we're going to
shoot it down I mean if that's the
mindset that you know we catch you doing
any spying we're gonna shoot it down yes
Norman just a question not a comment
rather a commander in the Sinai
committing an atrocity it's give him
credit for that or give him the label of
committing the atrocity was able to call
the Israeli Operations Center for the
air force in Tel Aviv for the Navy in
Haifa to get both of them to go along
with directing fighters and PT boats to
attack a ship to cover for him well what
happened was that the the original
request for this whole attack came from
a commander in the Sinai I mean even the
Israelis admit this but what they're
saying is the commander said we're being
bombarded by a ship out at sea and that
was the reason the Israelis give for
launching an original
well how could they be bombarded by the
Liberty it doesn't you know it doesn't
his guns couldn't even reach more than a
mile let alone 13 14 15 miles to the to
the town of El Arish find them an
aircraft were Air Force or Navy
personnel they were both I think well
maybe not but the the original person
that identified it from the Jane's
fighting ships was the naval a naval
liaison to the Israeli Air Force office
and he passed it on to the Deputy Chief
of Naval Operations so you know this is
a the problem is I don't have the money
or the time to investigate every last
detail of this case the point I'm trying
to make with this chapter is the US
government has an obligation to do it
and and there's enough I graduated from
law school and one of the things you
learn in law school is when you're
building a case you've built up probable
cause well there's enough probable cause
to show that the Israelis did it
deliberately it's not definitive proof
but I can't that's not my job is to come
up with definitive proof - the show
there's probable cause that the US
government should conduct its own
investigation which is what I think they
should do one other little point on that
was was one other thing I found was the
Israelis continually said they never saw
the American flag even though every
member of the crew said the flag was
flying during this entire time and one
of the people I found was a one of the
things nobody knew at the time was that
the NSA also had a plane flying above
the Liberty during the during the
incident and I talked to the the guy who
was achieved Hebrew Russian linguists he
was dual language capable and he said
that in the information they picked up
from the pilots and also the PT boats
there was mention of the US flag so I
you know that's what he that's what he
had to say yes released the gun camera
film from the aircraft that made the
attack you might want to check with the
embassy and try to get access to it
because the gun camera film which I've
seen is very interesting because the
smoke from the ship is going straight up
well it wasn't going straight up before
they attacked it and and you know you
got all these pilots there that those
USS Liberty is in big letters in the
back and they had the PT boat crew that
was there too so I mean you know tell
that to the crew one of the things the
captain of the ship
McGonigle never said a word about the
the weather it was deliberate or
accidental or who we believed or
anything during the entire 34 years and
he was awarded the Medal of Honor for
his courageousness and then the Johnson
administration managed to make an
exception in his case and not presented
at the White House by the president they
gave it to him in a back room of the
Naval Yard by the Secretary of the Navy
again trying to hide this whole thing
anyway so during his entire post naval
career he never said a word about it
until he was almost on his deathbed it
was four months before he died and he
finally said I think that the Israelis
did it deliberately and there needs to
be an investigation you know that's what
these people are saying and I just agree
with them that there needs to be an
investigation so so we could now get
some definitive answers here rather than
have some hack journalists here go out
and you know find out what he can I mean
we got an entire Congress and a Federal
Bureau of Investigation everybody else
that were supposed to be doing official
investigations but anyway I really
enjoyed being here and I you know it's a
thrill to talk to people in the
community I wish I could be asking you
all these questions now I so thanks very
much I appreciate it
Stanford on behalf of the Donna chapter
I'd like to thank you and we know that
you have a lot of loose papers so this
is intended to anchor them we don't want
them disappearing into the ether being
swept up and sucked up by NSA's
voracious that's right for data or paper
thanks for us I appreciate it to leave
and resume with the orders and also book
signing and we appreciate all of your
coming out this evening thank you once
again James Bamford is a former
investigative producer for ABC's World
News Tonight and the author of a new
book titled body of secrets anatomy of
the ultra-secret National Security
Agency it's number nine on this week's
New York Times bestseller list it's
published by doubleday if you'd like to
find out more information visit their
website at double D's
[Music]